The giant impact hypothesis goes like this : 4.5 billion years ago , a Mars-sized body named Theia slammed into the Earth . The collision launched magma -- some from Theia and some from Earth -- into orbit around our planet . The magma condensed and cooled into the rocky sphere that we see in the sky , our Moon .

This scenario -- explored through collision models -- handily explains the way that our Moon spins , its small core , and its lack of water . It is the most widely accepted scientific response to the question of how the Moon came to be hung in our sky .

But the giant impact hypothesis has suffered from one major problem : multiple analyses of lunar rocks suggest that the moon is made up of the same material as Earth . Collision models peg the moon at 70 to 90 percent material from Theia , and most bodies in our Solar System have very different compositions .

But based on examinations of lunar rocks , it's as though the big collision never happened . It is maybe the last `` major problem " with the giant impact hypothesis , says geochemist Daniel Herwartz , who also thinks he has solved it . In a paper published in Science on Thursday , he reported that the Moon does , in fact , contain a tell-tale sign of alien material .

To Herwartz -- or anyone studying lunar rocks with the intention of figuring out their origin—all rocks have a sort of cosmic address label . Since ratios of isotopes ( versions of an element with different numbers of neutrons ) on the Earth , Mars , and asteroids are unique , we know that our young Solar System was `` isotopically heterogeneous . " The isotopes in a rock reveal exactly where in the Solar System it formed .

Differences in oxygen isotope levels are particularly dramatic . According to previous readings of moon-rock oxygen , the difference between a key oxygen isotope measurement -- the ratio between three variations of oxygen , specifically -- appeared to be just 3 parts per million higher on the Moon than on Earth , a difference so small as to be negligible . Against the evidence from collision models , the Moon’s address label suggested that it was made mostly or entirely of Earth .

Herwartz thought that maybe the difference was more than statistical variance . He took samples from the Apollo 11 , 12 , and 16 missions ( lunar samples that fell to Earth were too contaminated ) . Using a high-precision method published earlier this year, he released the oxygen by heating it in a container with fluorine gas , purified it , and then measured the isotope ratios in a gas mass spectrometer .

On this re-evaluation , he found that the ratio between to oxygen isotopes on the Moon was , in fact , different : 12 parts per million higher on the Moon than on Earth .

This difference confirms that the Moon is not made of material that formed in the same region as Earth , and , most importantly , that it’s not merely a chunk of Earth . The isotope difference is still not terribly large -- Mars and the Earth differ by a factor of 300 ppm , for example . But that suggests Theia probably formed in a region of the solar system near Earth .

As for how much of the Moon is Theia and how much is Earth -- that’s still a mystery . After colliding with Earth , Theia ceased to exist as an independent body . Collision models peg the ratio at 70 percent to 90 percent. Herwartz suspects that it's closer to 50/50, but that’s just an informed guess at this point .

The details may be fuzzy , but as Herwartz said in a statement : `` we can now be reasonably sure that the giant collision took place. "